---
tags: research
authors: dcbrown
---
# ESEM 2025 Overview

Our paper _"Exploring the Evidence-Based SE Beliefs of Generative AI Tools"_ was accepted and recently presented at the ACM/IEEE International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement ([ESEM 2025](https://conf.researchr.org/home/esem-2025)) Emerging Results and Vision track. This post summarizes the problem we explored, provides an overview of our emerging results, and and future vision of AI-assisted software engineering. A preprint is available [here](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2407.13900).

**Exploring the Evidence-Based SE Beliefs of Generative AI Tools [ESEM ERV]**

Chris Brown and Jason Cusati 

* :mag: **Problem:** Generative AI tools are increasingly used to support software development, yet little is known about the "beliefs" of AI tools with regard to evidence-based practices supported by empirical SE research.


* :test_tube: **Study:** We conducted a _conceptual replication study_, prompting generative AI tools---ChatGPT, GitHub Copilot, Gemini, Blackbox AI, and Claude---to respond to questions regarding 17 evidence-based claims used in prior work to assess the beliefs of human software developers [Devanbu2016].

* :bar_chart: **Emerging Results:** We found generative AI tools typically have positive beliefs aligning with research claims, however can have ambiguous responses. Further, most tools lack credible evidence to support their claims.

* :bulb: **Vision:** We provide implications for software developers leveraging generative AI tools in practice. We also discuss future research directions to promote:
1. Evidence-based generative AI for SE;
2. Evidence-based AI integration within development workflows; and
3. Generative AI-based techniques for translating research evidence for practitioners.


This was my first time attending ESEM, and I really enjoyed presenting this work and connecting with members of this community. Visiting Honolulu was also an amazing experience :beach_umbrella: We hope this work provides useful insights and motivates future work to enhance evidence-based practices in generative AI-driven software development.

---
**References**
>>>
[Devanbu2016] P. Devanbu, T. Zimmermann, and C. Bird, “Belief & evidence in empirical software engineering,” in International conference on software engineering, pp. 108–119, 2016.